[**HOME**](index.md)


**Maven Build Lifecycle**

The Maven build follows a specific life cycle to deploy and distribute the target project.

There are three built-in life cycles:

* default: the main life cycle as it’s responsible for project deployment
* clean: to clean the project and remove all files generated by the previous build
* site: to create the project’s site documentation

Each life cycle consists of a sequence of phases. The default build life cycle consists of 23 phases as it’s the main build lifecycle.

On the other hand, clean life cycle consists of 3 phases, while the site lifecycle is made up of 4 phases.


___

For the full list of each lifecycle’s phases, check out the  <a href="http://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-lifecycle.html#Lifecycle_Reference" target="_blank">**Maven Reference.**</a>

**Maven Phases**

* **validate:** validate the project is correct and all necessary information is available
* **compile:** compile the source code of the project
* **test:** test the compiled source code using a suitable unit testing framework. These tests should not require the code be packaged or deployed
* **package:** take the compiled code and package it in its distributable format, such as a JAR.
* **integration-test:** process and deploy the package if necessary into an environment where integration tests can be run
* **verify:** run any checks to verify the package is valid and meets quality criteria
* **install:** install the package into the local repository, for use as a dependency in other projects locally
* **deploy:** done in an integration or release environment, copies the final package to the remote repository for sharing with other   developers and projects.

There are two other Maven lifecycles of note beyond the default list above. They are

* **clean:** cleans up artifacts created by prior builds
* **site:** generates site documentation for this project

Phases are actually mapped to underlying goals. The specific goals executed per phase is dependant upon the packaging type of the project. For example, package executes jar:jar if the project type is a JAR, and war:war if the project type is - you guessed it - a WAR.

An interesting thing to note is that phases and goals may be executed in sequence.

mvn <PHASE>
___


**Maven Goal**

Each phase is a sequence of goals, and each goal is responsible for a specific task.
When we run a phase – all goals bound to this phase are executed in order.

Here are some of the phases and default goals bound to them:

* compiler:compile – the compile goal from the compiler plugin is bound to the compile phase
* compiler:testCompile is bound to the test-compile phase
* surefire:test is bound to test phase
* install:install is bound to install phase
* jar:jar and war:war is bound to package phase

**Maven Plugins**

A Maven plugin is a group of goals. However, these goals aren’t necessarily all bound to the same phase.

For example, here’s a simple configuration of the Maven Failsafe plugin which is responsible for running integration tests:





